vṛkabhṛgumunimohinyambarīṣādivṛtte-
ṣvayi tava hi mahattvaṃ sarvaśarvādijaitram |
sthitamiha paramātman niṣkalārvāgabhinnaṃ
kimapi yadavabhātaṃ taddhi rūpaṃ tavaiva ||1||
vṛka-bhṛgumuni-	Vrikaasura, sage Bhrigu
mohinī-ambarīṣa-	(and Thy incarnation as) Mohini and Ambareesh
ādi-vṛtteṣu-ayi	etc., (in these) episodes, O Thou!
tava hi mahattvaṃ	Thy majesty only
sarva-śarva-ādi-jaitram	(above) all others, including Shiva, supersedes
sthitam-iha	proved here
paramātman	O Supreme Being!
niṣkala-arvāka-abhinnaṃ	Nishkala, Sakala and non-different
kim-api yat-	indescribable which
avabhātaṃ tat hi	shines that alone
rūpaṃ tava-eva	Thy form (is) Thine alone
O Supreme Being! The episodes of Vrikaasura, Sage Bhrigu, Thy Mohini Avataar and the Ambareesh episode only proves, here, that Thy majesty and superiority supersedes over all other deities like Shiva and others.Thou are non-different from Thy Nishkala (partless) form and Thy Sakala (part) forms like Shiva, Brahamaa, and shine in an indescribable manner as the essence of all.
mūrtitrayeśvarasadāśivapañcakaṃ yat
prāhu: parātmavapureva sadāśivo'smin |
tatreśvarastu sa vikuṇṭhapadastvameva
tritvaṃ punarbhajasi satyapade tribhāge ||2||
mūrti-traya-īśvara-	the Trimurti Ishwara and
sadāśiva-pañcakaṃ	Sadaashiva (are the) five aspects
yat prāhu:	which is said (by the Shaivaas)
parātma-vapu:-eva	the Supreme Being alone (Thou)
sadāśiva:-asmin	as Sadaashiva,here,
tatra-īśvara:-tu sa	and there the Ishwara indeed he
vikuṇṭhapada:-tvam-eva	(in) Vaikuntha residing Thou alone
tritvaṃ puna:-bhajasi	three forms again Thou assume
satyapade tribhāge	in the Satyaloka in three parts
The Shaivaas speak of five aspects with Brahmaa Vishnu Shiva Ishwara and Sadaashiva. Here Sadaashiva is Thy own self the Supreme Being. Thou alone are Ishwara the Lord of Vaikuntha. The three forms of Trinity, Thou alone assume in the three parts of Satyaloka.
tatrāpi sāttvikatanuṃ tava viṣṇumāhu-
rdhātā tu sattvaviralo rajasaiva pūrṇa: |
sattvotkaṭatvamapi cāsti tamovikāra-
ceṣṭādikañca tava śaṅkaranāmni mūrtau ||3||
tatra-api	there also
sāttvika-tanuṃ tava	the Saatvic form of Thee
viṣṇum-āhu:-	Vishnu is called
dhātā tu	Brahmaa indeed
sattva-virala:-	(with) Sattva sparse
rajasā-eva pūrṇa:	and Rajas only is full
sattva-utkaṭatvam-api	Sattva in full measure, though
ca-asti	and is
tama:-vikāra-	by Tamasa's blemish
ceṣṭā-ādikam-ca	activities etc (are)
tava śaṅkara-nāmni	in Thy Shankara named
mūrtau	form
The form of Vishnu, among the Trimurti, is a manifestation of pure Sattva. Brahmaa is the manifestation of abundance of Rajas with a trace of Sattva. Whereas, Thy form known as Shankara has an abundance of Sattva but Tamas expresses itself in its activities.
taṃ ca trimūrtyatigataṃ parapūruṣaṃ tvāṃ
śarvātmanāpi khalu sarvamayatvaheto: |
śaṃsantyupāsanavidhau tadapi svatastu
tvadrūpamityatidṛḍhaṃ bahu na: pramāṇam ||4||
taṃ ca trimūrti-atigataṃ	and Him, the Trimurtis transcending
parapūruṣaṃ tvāṃ	the Supreme Being Thee
śarva-ātmanā-api	in Shiva's form also
khalu	indeed
sarvamayatva-heto:	encompassing the essence of all, because of (this)
śaṃsanti-upāsana-vidhau	describe in the worshipping codes/norms
tat-api svata:-tu	that too in reality indeed
tvat-rūpam-iti-	(are) Thy form, thus (there are)
ati-dṛḍhaṃ	many strong
bahu na: pramāṇam	our proofs
Thou do transcend the Trinity and are the Supreme Being. Thou are the essence of all and Shaivas worship Thee alone as Shiva with worshipping norms, as described. That too is Thy form alone. We have many proofs in support of this truth.
śrīśaṅkaro'pi bhagavān sakaleṣu tāva-
ttvāmeva mānayati yo na hi pakṣapātī |
tvanniṣṭhameva sa hi nāmasahasrakādi
vyākhyāt bhavatstutiparaśca gatiṃ gato'nte ||5||
śrī śaṅkara:-api	The great Shakaraachaarya also
bhagavān	the Bhagavatpaada,
sakaleṣu tāvat-	among all the Sakala forms, then,
tvām-eva mānayati	to Thee alone gives honour
ya:-na hi pakṣapātī	who does not favour anyone
tvat-niṣṭham-eva	to Thee referring to, alone
sa hi nāma-sahasraka-ādi	he indeed , on Sahasranaam etc.,
vyākhyāt	commented on
bhavat-stuti-para:-ca	and Thy praises singing, inclined to,
gatiṃ gata:-ante	samaadhi attained to, in the end
Bhagavatpaada Shree Shankaraachaarya also, among all the Sakala forms, honours Thy form alone. He who is not of the nature of favouring any one deity has commented on the Sahasranaama etc., referring to Thee alone. In the end he attained samaadhi singing Thy praises.
mūrtitrayātigamuvāca ca mantraśāstra-
syādau kalāyasuṣamaṃ sakaleśvaraṃ tvām |
dhyānaṃ ca niṣkalamasau praṇave khalūktvā
tvāmeva tatra sakalaṃ nijagāda nānyam ||6||
mūrti-traya-atigam-	the Trinity transcending
uvāca ca mantra-śāstrasya-ādau	and (he) said, in the beginning of the Mantra Shastra
kalāya-suṣamam	beautiful as the Kalaaya flower (blue lily)
sakala-īśvaraṃ tvām	the Lord of all, Thee
dhyānaṃ ca niṣkalam-	and meditation on Nish-kala (non-part)
asau praṇave khalu-uktvā	he (Shankara) in Pranava, indeed, describing
tvām-eva tatra sakalaṃ	Thee alone there Sakal (in part)
nijagāda na-anyam	propounded, not any other
In his famous work of Mantra Shastra, known as Prapanchasaara, Shri Shankara has described Thee as transcending the Trinity - Brahmaa, Vishnu and Mahesh. He has described Thee as a beautiful blue lily and the Lord of all. When he describes the meditation on Nishkala, while dealing with Pranava, he also propounds Thy Sakala form, and of no other deity, Thee as the object of meditation.
samastasāre ca purāṇasaṅgrahe
visaṃśayaṃ tvanmahimaiva varṇyate |
trimūrtiyuksatyapadatribhāgata:
paraṃ padaṃ te kathitaṃ na śūlina: ||7||
samasta-sāre	and inclusive of all the gist
ca purāṇa-saṅgrahe	in Puraana Sangraha
visaṃśayaṃ	unequivocally (without doubt)
tvat-mahimā-eva varṇyate	Thy supreme greatness alone is described
trimūrti-yuk-	the Trinity containing
satyapada-tribhāgata: paraṃ	the Satyaloka in three parts, transcending,
padaṃ te kathitaṃ	Thy abofe is described
na śūlina:	not (the abode) of Shiva
In the text of Puraana Sangraha where there is the gist of all the Puraanas,Thy supreme greatness alone is unequivocally described. The Trimurti occupying the Satyaloka in three parts has been depicted. But Thy abode, Vaikuntha has been described as distinct and superior to and so transcending Satyaloka. No reference is made to the abode of Shiva.
yat brāhmakalpa iha bhāgavatadvitīya-
skandhoditaṃ vapuranāvṛtamīśa dhātre |
tasyaiva nāma hariśarvamukhaṃ jagāda
śrīmādhava: śivaparo'pi purāṇasāre ||8||
yat brāhmakalpa iha	that which in the Braahmakalpa, here,
bhāgavata-dvitīya-skandha-uditaṃ	(and) in the second Skanda of Bhaagavata, narrated
vapu:-anāvṛtam-	that form, revealed
īśa dhātre	O Lord! For Brahamaa
tasya-eva nāma	that form's, alone, name
hari-śarva-mukhaṃ	Hari, Shiva etc.,
jagāda śrīmādhava:	has been said of, by Shri Maadhavaachaarya
śiva-para:-api	who was a devotee od Shiva himself
purāṇa-sāre	in Puraanasaara
O Lord! Here, at the time of Braahmakalpa, Thou had revealed Thy form to Brahmaa, which is described in the second Skanda of the Bhaagavatam. Maadhavaachaarya, who was himself a votary of Shiva, has referred to that same form with the names Hari, Shiva etc., in Puraanasaara.
ye svaprakṛtyanuguṇā giriśaṃ bhajante
teṣāṃ phalaṃ hi dṛḍhayaiva tadīyabhaktyā|
vyāso hi tena kṛtavānadhikāriheto:
skandādikeṣu tava hānivaco'rthavādai: ||9||
ye sva-prakṛti-anuguṇā	those who by their natural inclination worship Shiva
giriśaṃ bhajante	worship Shiva
teṣāṃ phalaṃ hi dṛḍhayā-eva	for them the results are by firmness only
tadīya-bhaktyā	in their devotion
vyāsa:-hi tena kṛtavān-	sage Vyaasa himself has asserted
adhikāra-heto:	as a benefit for such devotion
skanda-ādikeṣu	in the Skanda and other scriptures
tava hāni-vaca:-	(speaking for) belittling words
arthavādai:	by way of eulogy
People who by their natural inclination are devoted to worship Shiva, for them, the results (liberation) are achieved by their firmness in their devotion only. In the Skanda and other Scriptures, sage Vyaasa has asserted this, for the benefit of such devotees, with statements that belittle Thee which are to be taken as eulogy.
bhūtārthakīrtiranuvādaviruddhavādau
tredhārthavādagataya: khalu rocanārthā: |
skāndādikeṣu bahavo'tra viruddhavādā-
stvattāmasatvaparibhūtyupaśikṣaṇādyā: ||10||
bhūta-artha-kīrti:-	existing facts exaggeration
anuvāda-viruddha-vādau	in accordance with experience, and contrary to experience, these two methods,
tredhā-artha-vāda-gataya:	(in all) these three are the modes (of Arthavaada)
khalu rocana-arthā:	indeed (they are to make) interesting the subject meaning
skānd-ādikeṣu	in the Skaanda and other scriptures
bahava:-atra	many are here
viruddha-vādā:-	contrary statements
tvat-tāmasatva-	(for example) Thy Taamasic (nature)
paribhūti-upaśikṣaṇa-ādyā:	(Thy) defeat, Thou being instructed by others etc.
Arthavaada has three methods- 1) statements where existing facts are exaggerated, 2)statements are in accordance with experience, 3)statements are contrary to experience. These are used to make the subject matter interesting. In the Skaanda Puraana and other scriptures there are many contrary statements, referring to Thy Taamasic nature, Thy defeat or Thou being instructed by others etc., which are in the category of the third method.
yat kiñcidapyaviduṣā'pi vibho mayoktaṃ
tanmantraśāstravacanādyabhidṛṣṭameva |
vyāsoktisāramayabhāgavatopagīta
kleśān vidhūya kuru bhaktibharaṃ parātman ||11||
yat-kiñcit-api-	what little even
aviduṣā-api	by (me) the ignorant, though
vibho mayā-uktaṃ	O Lord! By me is said
tat-mantraśāstra-vacanādi-	that expounded in Mantra Shaastra statements
abhidṛṣṭam-eva	is in accordance (to that) only
vyāsa-ukti-sāra-maya-	all Vyaasa's sayings' essence contained
bhāgavata-upagīta	(in) Bhaagavata (where) are sung (Thy excellences)
kleśān vidhūya	(That Thou) my ailments eradicating
kuru bhaktibharaṃ	endow firm devotion (to me)
parātman	O Supreme Being!
O Supreme Being! Though I am an ignorant man, what little I have said, is in accordance to what is expounded in the Mantra Shaastra. Bhaagavata is the essence of all the sayings of sage Vyaasa and Thy excellences are sung there in. Deign to eradicate my ailments and endow firm devotion to me.